---
layout: post
title: "How to set up a national RSE association?"
---

Authors: James Hetherington *Alan Turing Institute*,
Ben van Werkhoven *Netherlands eScience Center*,
Robert Haines *University of Manchester*,
Stephan Janosch *Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics*,
Paul Hagan *British Oceanographic Data Centre*,
Samar Elsheikh *University of Cape Town*,
Radek Lonka *Norwegian University of Science and Technology*

In this article we explain how to get an RSE network or association started 
in your country, region, community or institution. It first summarises the 
argument that has worked in other places, and the tone and style to take in 
persuading researchers of the value of RSEs. After that we list a number of 
practical steps that are often taken in starting a network.

<!--break-->

## The argument

In making the argument for RSEs, do not emphasise the need for a better, 
more stable career for people like you! Nobody cares. Honestly. Instead, the 
argument must be based on how a well-established RSE role will make science 
better.

### The core argument

The argument for RSEs has five core steps. Each needs to be made. Do not 
miss out any steps!

Firstly, you need to establish the importance of software for research. 
Almost all science uses software now. This includes data-analysis scripting 
and experimental control software as well as modelling and simulation.

Secondly, you need to demonstrate that the current practice of scientific 
software is flawed. Be familiar with the discussions around science’s 
“reproducibility crisis”. Discuss how each new project often re-invents the 
wheel, starting again so that we do not stand on giant’s shoulders as often 
as we should. Discuss how slow-running software doesn’t just waste 
resources, but also blocks opportunities for exploration and experiment. 
Suggest that research can be made more impactful through usable user 
interfaces.

Thirdly, explain that there are well-known techniques from professional 
software engineering that can solve all these problems. (Version control, 
automated testing, disciplined-yet-agile project management, 
parallelisation, web-based interfaces.) Software engineers are trained in 
these, and can help spread these practices throughout your postdoctoral and 
PhD student community.

Fourthly, explain that working on software at the frontiers of science and 
scholarship requires an understanding of the research context. Generalist 
software engineers without a research background can find it particularly 
difficult to get to grips with the mathematical aspects of a research 
domain, its vocabulary, and with the cultural assumptions of the academic 
community. They can often bring over-engineered “Enterprise” solutions, and 
create software that is not sustainable by the research community after they 
are gone.

Finally, explain the RSE role itself: a hybrid role, both fully a part of 
the scholarly community *and* an IT professional. Interested in the research 
context and capable of understanding the scientific literature, but not 
following their own personal research agenda. Incentivised and measured by 
code output as much as through traditional academic metrics. Embedded within 
the research community to allow practices and knowledge to diffuse, but with 
a professional network of other RSEs. A complement to the existing 
postdoctoral career structure, for those who want to focus on the software 
side of their work.

To recap: **"Software is important to science, scientific software is broken,
software engineering can help, but you need software engineers with
scientific understanding, so you need research software engineers!"**

### The tone to take

It is important to frame arguments in favour of RSEs, and RSE organizations, 
in terms of how they will support the research community and, indeed, how 
they will support and improve scientific practice. A key point of focus here 
is that of support. RSEs are expert software engineers and have a wealth of 
experiences of using computational methods for research that many 
researchers, however eminent in their respective fields, don’t have, so it 
is important that an atmosphere of collaboration and mutual benefit is 
preserved. No one ever won hearts and minds by being overly critical of 
someone’s ability or working methods. Support, advise, demonstrate; don’t 
sneer, mock or be aggressive.

There are enough people in academia and research who give the impression 
that they are a know-it-all who thinks everyone else is stupid. Don’t add 
yourself to that group!

Sometimes we can uncover uncomfortable truths in the course of our work. You 
may offend people by pointing out that they’ve been following bad software 
development practices for decades. Be gentle - start by helping. Remember 
that what is bad practice now, may not have been bad practice a few years 
ago. If you uncover errors in code that has been used to produce scholarly 
outputs, such as papers, then you are duty bound to flag this to the 
researcher in question. It is not your responsibility to report the errors 
to the editors of the publication directly. Leave the decision of whether to 
retract or update to the research team as a whole; do the errors, once 
corrected, invalidate the science? That is a call that you have to make with 
all involved.

A related argument against the involvement of an RSE in a research project 
might be, “I don’t want to share my software with anyone; you might find 
bugs in it”!

### The evidence

You will also need to cite evidence for each of these points in the 
argument. You can find evidence for this in the results of a survey of your 
research community, (see below for more detail on how to do this), and can 
use headline figures from the results of previous surveys in other places, 
and our catalogue of case-studies. For [the 2014 UK Research Software Survey 
see here](https://www.software.ac.uk/blog/2014-12-04-its-impossible-conduct-research-without-software-say-7-out-10-uk-researchers)


## Practical steps

This section contains a number of practical step that are intended to help 
you getting started with creating your own RSE network or association.

### Success stories

Stories and case studies that illustrate the impact of RSE involvement in
research projects can be a powerful way to win support. If you join the
RSE Slack and ask for examples you will be likely to find plenty of
material. This will be even easier in the future as an international
RSE "evidence bank" is under construction where we can pool our best
resources to help with this.

### Have/Attend a workshop at an e-Science conference or two

So where and how do you find people to join forces with? First we are in 
lucky situation to have running conferences and workshops about research 
software/research infrastructure. The next big ones are the [RSE18 in 
September](http://rse.ac.uk/conf2018/) and
[eScience 2018 in October/November](http://www.escience2018.com). If you
go there you might bump into people 
from your neighbourhood. Check the attendees list. You can also ask the 
organizers beforehand, if they expect someone from your country. The 
organizers probably did some outreach and are willing to help you. If you 
cannot find anyone from your country, don’t worry, you might find someone 
with the same cultural background from your continent. There must be 
someone, right? And meeting someone face to face helps way more to build a 
trustworthy relationship.

### A core team

As soon as you are aware of the RSE role you can start looking for people 
who do this kind of work. You might find colleagues in your field just next 
door or you may need to leave your field and start exploring unknown 
territories. Start with a simple question: Is software being used at your 
place? If yes, who are the users/creators of this software? Inviting these 
persons to a tea/coffee might work just fine. Sometimes your colleagues 
travel around, ask them to keep their eyes open. They might be able to help 
spotting interesting people which you then can contact remotely.

What would be topics you can chat about?
   * How important is research software in your context?
   * Who are the users?
   * How is it created and maintained?
   * What does your career look like?

### A survey of the research community

Holding a survey is not just there to gather information it is actually also 
a great way of spreading the word and getting in touch with people that 
would want to be involved in the RSE association that you are setting up.

There are basically two types of surveys that you could organize targeting 
different audiences. The first type targets all of research, and is about 
gathering the evidence or need for RSEs in the first place. A great example 
of this survey was carried out in the UK in 2014, which showed the very 
large role that software has in research and the need for people that can do 
professional software development of research software.

The second type of survey targets RSEs specifically. The goal here is really 
to outreach to the RSEs, getting a better picture of the where the RSEs are, 
what they are doing, and if there are any problems that all of them are 
dealing with in their jobs. Keep in mind however, that this should not boil 
down to being an employment satisfaction survey. The reason you are doing 
this is not because you and your co-workers want better career 
opportunities. Instead, keep the bigger picture in mind of trying to fix the 
problems with software in science.

Practical advice on setting up the survey is to get in touch with Simon 
Hettrick and Olivier Philippe about organizing a survey for RSEs in your 
region or country. There is a repository on GitHub that is used for creating 
the RSE surveys in different countries including the UK, Germany, Canada, 
South Africa, the US, and the Netherlands. See here for more information: 
https://github.com/softwaresaved/international-survey

Adjusting and fine-tuning the survey to your specific region is very 
important and this will take some time. It’s important to understand local 
data protection laws as well as knowing what you can and cannot ask 
depending on your culture.

Spreading the word about the survey is best done through a bottom-up 
approach. It can take forever if you try to organize this top-down involving 
different organizations. In our experience, the best way is to ask the 
people you know to spread the word and try to get people who write 
newsletters to also include an announcement of your survey. And of course 
use social media, including LinkedIn and Twitter.

### Press and blogs

Wider publicity for the RSE movement through established media outlets is a 
great way to raise awareness, and drive engagement. Don’t be afraid to turn 
to friends or colleagues who may be able to give you a plug through their 
prefered channel, or reach out to specialist journalists who may have a 
professional interest in promoting your activities.

A feature or blog-post in a prominent publication is obviously a great way 
to reach a wider audience, but Twitter, Facebook, Linkedin are also great 
platforms for sharing stories and gaining traction.

Exemplar Initial blog posts: 
   * [The Craftsperson and the Scholar](https://www.software.ac.uk/blog/2016-10-07-craftsperson-and-scholar)
   * [The researcher programmer, a new species?](https://dirkgorissen.com/2012/03/26/the-researcher-programmer-a-new-species/)
   * [Is the work of scientific software engineers recognised in academia?](https://software.ac.uk/blog/2012-04-23-work-scientific-software-engineers-recognised-academia)
   * [Introducing NL-RSE](https://blog.esciencecenter.nl/introducing-nl-rse-98431969e2b8) 

Get an article in a magazine! (Make friends with a journalist):
   * [Save your work – give software engineers a career track](https://www.timeshighereducation.com/news/save-your-work-give-software-engineers-a-career-track/2006431.article)
   * [Researchers both rely on software - and overlook it](https://www.software.ac.uk/index.php/blog/2016-09-12-researchers-both-rely-software-and-overlook-it) (originally appeared in Research Fortnight)

### Get someone to give a talk

A great way to make a compelling case for the importance of RSE groups - be 
they local, regional, or national - is to draft in an evangelist from the 
existing community to present for stakeholders, either formally or 
informally, on the virtues of RSE.

You can contact the RSE through any of our online channels to initiate a 
conversation about how we can help, and find out about the availability of 
our team to visit in person.

### Forming an organisation 

Finally, after clearly defining the needs of establishing a national RSE 
organisation, setting-up its core team, raise awareness of what it can 
provide to local research communities and individual researchers, it is time 
to form the organization. This could be through creating a website, mailing 
list, github repository and a regular national reports to keep researchers 
updated.

The general advice to get this off the ground is to start small. This means 
without a legal entity and without any payment fees or formal registration 
to join the association. In the UK at the start, and also in Germany and the 
Netherlands, all it takes to join the association is to subscribe to the 
mailinglist. This lowers the entry barrier and also makes it very easy to 
setup.

Regardless of the amount of communication on your mailinglist at first, 
using a mailinglist has been invaluable as a measure of membership. It 
allows you to quickly see how many people are interested in your cause. Note 
that every researcher has an email address, and that not everyone uses 
Twitter or Slack.

The mailinglist itself has become a valuable job advertising resource for UK 
RSE, which recently moved to weekly digests for job adverts to keep the 
volume in control. It’s best to use the mailinglist for announcements and 
use other means of communication, for example Slack, for discussions.

### Make your organisation known to the world

Now that you've established a national RSE association, it is time to connect
your association internationally! Please make your brand new association
known to the
[international network of RSE associations](http://researchsoftware.org/)!
